===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
PORTFOLIO	/	PENGUIN
Published	by	the	Penguin	Group
Penguin	Group	(USA)	LLC
375	Hudson	Street
New	York,	New	York	10014
USA	|	Canada	|	UK	|	Ireland	|	Australia	|	New	Zealand	|	India	|	South	Africa	|	China
penguin.com
A	Penguin	Random	House	Company
Published	by	Portfolio	/	Penguin,	a	member	of	Penguin	Group	(USA)	LLC,	2014
Copyright	©	2014	by	Nir	Eyal
Penguin	supports	copyright.	Copyright	fuels	creativity,	encourages	diverse	voices,	promotes	free	speech,	and	creates	a	vibrant	culture.
Thank	you	for	buying	an	authorized	edition	of	this	book	and	for	complying	with	copyright	laws	by	not	reproducing,	scanning,	or
distributing	any	part	of	it	in	any	form	without	permission.	You	are	supporting	writers	and	allowing	Penguin	to	continue	to	publish
books	for	every	reader.
Hooked
	was	previously	published	by	the	author.
LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS	CATALOGING-
IN-PUBLICATION	DATA
Eyal,	Nir.
Hooked	:	how	to	build	habit-forming	products	/	Nir	Eyal	with	Ryan	Hoover.
pages	cm
Includes	bibliographical	references.
eBook	ISBN	978-0-698-19066-5
1.	New	products.	2.	Consumer	behavior.	3.	Consumers’	preferences.	I.	Title.
HF5415.153.E93	2014
658.5'75—dc23
2014022222
Version_1

===== PAGE 4 =====
contents
Title	Page
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction
1:	The	Habit	Zone
2:	Trigger
3:	Action
4:	Variable	Reward
5:	Investment
6:	What	Are	You	Going	to	Do	with	This?
7:	Case	Study:	The	Bible	App
8:	Habit	Testing	and	Where	to	Look	for	Habit-Forming
Opportunities
Acknowledgments
Appendix
Notes

===== PAGE 5 =====
For	Julie

===== PAGE 6 =====
introduction
Seventy-nine	percent	of	
smartphone	owners	check	their	device	within	fifteen
minutes	of	waking	up	every	morning.
1
	Perhaps	more	startling,	fully	one-third	of
Americans	say	they	would	rather	give	up	sex	than	lose	their	cell	phones.
2
A	2011	university	study	suggested	people	check	their	phones	thirty-four
times	per	day.
3
	However,	industry	insiders	believe	that	number	is	closer	to	an
astounding	150	daily	sessions.
4
Face	it:	We’re	hooked.
The	technologies	we	use	have	turned	into	compulsions,	if	not	full-fledged
addictions.	It’s	the	impulse	to	check	a	message	notification.	It’s	the	pull	to	visit
YouTube,	Facebook,	or	Twitter	for	just	a	few	minutes,	only	to	find	yourself	still
tapping	and	scrolling	an	hour	later.	It’s	the	urge	you	likely	feel	throughout	your
day	but	hardly	notice.
Cognitive	psychologists	define	
habits
	as	“automatic	behaviors	triggered	by
situational	cues”:	things	we	do	with	little	or	no	conscious	thought.
5
	The	products
and	services	we	use	habitually	alter	our	everyday	behavior,	just	as	their
designers	intended.
6
	Our	actions	have	been	engineered.
How	do	companies,	producing	little	more	than	bits	of	code	displayed	on	a
screen,	seemingly	control	users’	minds?	What	makes	some	products	so	habit
forming?
Forming	habits	is	imperative	for	the	survival	of	many	products.	As	infinite
distractions	compete	for	our	attention,	companies	are	learning	to	master	novel
tactics	to	stay	relevant	in	users’	minds.	Amassing	millions	of	users	is	no	longer
good	enough.	Companies	increasingly	find	that	their	economic	value	is	a
function	of	the	strength	of	the	habits	they	create.	In	order	to	win	the	loyalty	of
their	users	and	create	a	product	that’s	regularly	used,	companies	must	learn	not
only	what	compels	users	to	click	but	also	what	makes	them	tick.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Although	some	companies	are	just	waking	up	to	this	new	reality,	others	are
already	cashing	in.	By	mastering	habit-forming	product	design,	the	companies
profiled	in	this	book	make	their	goods	indispensable.
FIRST	TO	MIND	WINS
Companies	that	form	strong	user	habits	enjoy	several	benefits	to	their	bottom	line.
These	companies	attach	their	product	to	
internal	triggers
.	As	a	result,	users	show
up	without	any	external	prompting.
Instead	of	relying	on	expensive	marketing,	habit-forming	companies	link	their
services	to	the	users’	daily	routines	and	emotions.
7
	A	habit	is	at	work	when	users
feel	a	tad	bored	and	instantly	open	Twitter.	They	feel	a	pang	of	loneliness	and
before	rational	thought	occurs,	they	are	scrolling	through	their	Facebook	feeds.	A
question	comes	to	mind	and	before	searching	their	brains,	they	query	Google.	The
first-to-mind	solution	wins.	In	chapter	1	of	this	book,	we	explore	the	competitive
advantages	of	habit-forming	products.
How	do	products	create	habits?	The	answer:	They	manufacture	them.	While
fans	of	the	television	show	
Mad	Men
	are	familiar	with	how	the	ad	industry	once
created	consumer	desire	during	Madison	Avenue’s	golden	era,	those	days	are
long	gone.	A	multiscreen	world	of	ad-wary	consumers	has	rendered	Don	Draper’s
big-budget	brainwashing	useless	to	all	but	the	biggest	brands.
Today,	small	start-up	teams	can	profoundly	change	behavior	by	guiding	users
through	a	series	of	experiences	I	call	
hooks
.	The	more	often	users	run	through
these	hooks,	the	more	likely	they	are	to	form	habits.
How	I	Got	Hooked
In	2008	I	was	among	a	team	of	Stanford	MBAs	starting	a	company	backed	by
some	of	the	brightest	investors	in	Silicon	Valley.	Our	mission	was	to	build	a
platform	for	placing	advertising	into	the	booming	world	of	online	social	games.
Notable	companies	were	making	hundreds	of	millions	of	dollars	selling
virtual	cows	on	digital	farms	while	advertisers	were	spending	huge	sums	of
money	to	influence	people	to	buy	whatever	they	were	peddling.	I	admit	I	didn’t
get	it	at	first	and	found	myself	standing	at	the	water’s	edge	wondering,	“How	do
they	do	it?”
At	the	intersection	of	these	two	industries	dependent	on	mind	manipulation,
I	embarked	upon	a	journey	to	learn	how	products	change	our	actions	and,	at
times,	create	compulsions.	How	did	these	companies	engineer	user	behavior?

===== PAGE 8 =====
What	were	the	moral	implications	of	building	potentially	addictive	products?
Most	important,	could	the	same	forces	that	made	these	experiences	so
compelling	also	be	used	to	build	products	to	improve	people’s	lives?
Where	could	I	find	the	blueprints	for	forming	habits?	To	my	disappointment,
I	found	no	guide.	Businesses	skilled	in	behavior	design	guarded	their	secrets,
and	although	I	uncovered	books,	white	papers,	and	blog	posts	tangentially
related	to	the	topic,	there	was	no	how-to	manual	for	building	habit-forming
products.
I	began	documenting	my	observations	of	hundreds	of	companies	to	uncover
patterns	in	user-experience	designs	and	functionality.	Although	every	business
had	its	unique	flavor,	I	sought	to	identify	the	commonalities	behind	the	winners
and	understand	what	was	missing	among	the	losers.
I	looked	for	insights	from	academia,	drawing	upon	consumer	psychology,
human-computer	interaction,	and	behavioral	economics	research.	In	2011	I
began	sharing	what	I	learned	and	started	working	as	a	consultant	to	a	host	of
Silicon	Valley	companies,	from	small	start-ups	to	Fortune	500	enterprises.	Each
client	provided	an	opportunity	to	test	my	theories,	draw	new	insights,	and	refine
my	thinking.	I	began	blogging	about	what	I	learned	at	NirAndFar.com,	and	my
essays	were	syndicated	to	other	sites.	Readers	soon	began	writing	in	with	their
own	observations	and	examples.
In	the	fall	of	2012	Dr.	Baba	Shiv	and	I	designed	and	taught	a	class	at	the
Stanford	Graduate	School	of	Business	on	the	science	of	influencing	human
behavior.	The	next	year,	I	partnered	with	Dr.	Steph	Habif	to	teach	a	similar
course	at	the	Hasso	Plattner	Institute	of	Design.
These	years	of	distilled	research	and	real-world	experience	resulted	in	the
creation	of	the	Hook	Model:	a	four-phase	process	companies	use	to	forms	habits.
Through	consecutive	Hook	cycles,	successful	products	reach	their
ultimate	goal	of	unprompted	user	engagement,	bringing	users	back
repeatedly,	without	depending	on	costly	advertising	or	aggressive
messaging.
While	I	draw	many	examples	from	technology	companies	given	my	industry
background,	hooks	are	everywhere—in	apps,	sports,	movies,	games,	and	even
our	jobs.	Hooks	can	be	found	in	virtually	any	experience	that	burrows	into	our
minds	(and	often	our	wallets).	The	four	steps	of	the	Hook	Model	provide	the
framework	for	the	chapters	of	this	book.

===== PAGE 9 =====
The	Hook	Model
1.	Trigger
A	
trigger
	is	the	actuator	of	behavior—the	spark	plug	in	the	engine.	Triggers
come	in	two	types:	external	and	internal.
8
	Habit-forming	products	start	by
alerting	users	with	external	triggers	like	an	e-mail,	a	Web	site	link,	or	the	app
icon	on	a	phone.
For	example,	suppose	Barbra,	a	young	woman	in	Pennsylvania,	happens	to
see	a	photo	in	her	Facebook	News	Feed	taken	by	a	family	member	from	a	rural
part	of	the	state.	It’s	a	lovely	picture	and	because	she	is	planning	a	trip	there	with
her	brother	Johnny,	the	external	trigger’s	call	to	action	(in	marketing	and
advertising	lingo)	intrigues	her	and	she	clicks.	By	cycling	through	successive

===== PAGE 10 =====
hooks,	users	begin	to	form	associations	with	internal	triggers,	which	attach	to
existing	behaviors	and	emotions.
When	users	start	to	automatically	cue	their	next	behavior,	the	new	habit
becomes	part	of	their	everyday	routine.	Over	time,	Barbra	associates	Facebook
with	her	need	for	social	connection.	Chapter	2	explores	external	and	internal
triggers,	answering	the	question	of	how	product	designers	determine	which
triggers	are	most	effective.
2.	Action
Following	the	trigger	comes	the	action:	the	behavior	done	in	anticipation	of	a
reward.	The	simple	action	of	clicking	on	the	interesting	picture	in	her	news	feed
takes	Barbra	to	a	Web	site	called	Pinterest,	a	“social	bookmarking	site	with	a
virtual	pinboard.”
9
This	phase	of	the	Hook,	as	described	in	chapter	3,	draws	upon	the	art	and
science	of	usability	design	to	reveal	how	products	drive	specific	user	actions.
Companies	leverage	two	basic	pulleys	of	human	behavior	to	increase	the
likelihood	of	an	action	occurring:	the	ease	of	performing	an	action	and	the
psychological	motivation	to	do	it.
10
Once	Barbra	completes	the	simple	action	of	clicking	on	the	photo,	she	is
dazzled	by	what	she	sees	next.
3.	Variable	Reward
What	distinguishes	the	Hook	Model	from	a	plain	vanilla	feedback	loop	is	the
Hook’s	ability	to	create	a	craving.	Feedback	loops	are	all	around	us,	but
predictable	ones	don’t	create	desire.	The	unsurprising	response	of	your	fridge
light	turning	on	when	you	open	the	door	doesn’t	drive	you	to	keep	opening	it
again	and	again.	However,	add	some	variability	to	the	mix—suppose	a	different
treat	magically	appears	in	your	fridge	every	time	you	open	it—and	voilà,
intrigue	is	created.
Variable	rewards	are	one	of	the	most	powerful	tools	companies	implement	to
hook	users;	chapter	4	explains	them	in	further	detail.	Research	shows	that	levels
of	the	neurotransmitter	dopamine	surge	when	the	brain	is	expecting	a	reward.
11
Introducing	variability	multiplies	the	effect,	creating	a	focused	state,	which
suppresses	the	areas	of	the	brain	associated	with	judgment	and	reason	while

===== PAGE 11 =====
activating	the	parts	associated	with	wanting	and	desire.
12
	Although	classic
examples	include	slot	machines	and	lotteries,	variable	rewards	are	prevalent	in
many	other	habit-forming	products.
When	Barbra	lands	on	Pinterest,	not	only	does	she	see	the	image	she
intended	to	find,	but	she	is	also	served	a	multitude	of	other	glittering	objects.
The	images	are	related	to	what	she	is	generally	interested	in—namely	things	to
see	on	her	upcoming	trip	to	rural	Pennsylvania—but	there	are	other	things	that
catch	her	eye	as	well.	The	exciting	juxtaposition	of	relevant	and	irrelevant,
tantalizing	and	plain,	beautiful	and	common,	sets	her	brain’s	dopamine	system
aflutter	with	the	promise	of	reward.	Now	she’s	spending	more	time	on	Pinterest,
hunting	for	the	next	wonderful	thing	to	find.	Before	she	knows	it,	she’s	spent
forty-five	minutes	scrolling.
Chapter	4	also	explores	why	some	people	eventually	lose	their	taste	for
certain	experiences	and	how	variability	impacts	their	retention.
4.	Investment
The	last	phase	of	the	Hook	Model	is	where	the	user	does	a	bit	of	work.	The
investment	phase	increases	the	odds	that	the	user	will	make	another	pass	through
the	Hook	cycle	in	the	future.	The	investment	occurs	when	the	user	puts
something	into	the	product	of	service	such	as	time,	data,	effort,	social	capital,	or
money.
However,	the	investment	phase	isn’t	about	users	opening	up	their	wallets	and
moving	on	with	their	day.	Rather,	the	investment	implies	an	action	that	improves
the	service	for	the	next	go-around.	Inviting	friends,	stating	preferences,	building
virtual	assets,	and	learning	to	use	new	features	are	all	investments	users	make	to
improve	their	experience.	These	commitments	can	be	leveraged	to	make	the
trigger	more	engaging,	the	action	easier,	and	the	reward	more	exciting	with
every	pass	through	the	Hook	cycle.	Chapter	5	delves	into	how	investments
encourage	users	to	cycle	through	successive	hooks.
As	Barbra	enjoys	endlessly	scrolling	through	the	Pinterest	cornucopia,	she
builds	a	desire	to	keep	the	things	that	delight	her.	By	collecting	items,	she	gives
the	site	data	about	her	preferences.	Soon	she	will	follow,	pin,	repin,	and	make
other	investments,	which	serve	to	increase	her	ties	to	the	site	and	prime	her	for
future	loops	through	the	Hook.

===== PAGE 12 =====
A	New	Superpower
Habit-forming	technology	is	already	here,	and	it	is	being	used	to	mold	our	lives.
The	fact	that	we	have	greater	access	to	the	web	through	our	various	connected
devices—smartphones	and	tablets,	televisions,	game	consoles,	and	wearable
technology—gives	companies	far	greater	ability	to	affect	our	behavior.
As	companies	combine	their	increased	connectivity	to	consumers,	with	the
ability	to	collect,	mine,	and	process	customer	data	at	faster	speeds,	we	are	faced
with	a	future	where	everything	becomes	potentially	more	habit	forming.	As
famed	Silicon	Valley	investor	Paul	Graham	writes,	“Unless	the	forms	of
technological	progress	that	produced	these	things	are	subject	to	different	laws
than	technological	progress	in	general,	the	world	will	get	more	addictive	in	the
next	40	years	than	it	did	in	the	last	40.”
13
	Chapter	6	explores	this	new	reality	and
discusses	the	morality	of	manipulation.
Recently,	a	blog	reader	e-mailed	me,	“If	it	can’t	be	used	for	evil,	it’s	not	a
superpower.”	He’s	right.	And	under	this	definition,	building	habit-forming
products	is	indeed	a	superpower.	If	used	irresponsibly,	bad	habits	can	quickly
degenerate	into	mindless,	zombielike	addictions.
Did	you	recognize	Barbra	and	her	brother	Johnny	from	the	previous
example?	Zombie	film	buffs	likely	did.	They	are	characters	from	the	classic
horror	flick	
Night	of	the	Living	Dead
,	a	story	about	people	possessed	by	a
mysterious	force,	which	compels	their	every	action.
14
No	doubt	you’ve	noticed	the	resurgence	of	the	zombie	genre	over	the	past
several	years.	Games	like	
Resident	Evil
,	television	shows	like	
The	Walking
Dead
,	and	movies	including	
World	War	Z
	are	a	testament	to	the	creatures’
growing	appeal.	But	why	are	zombies	suddenly	so	fascinating?	Perhaps
technology’s	unstoppable	progress—ever	more	pervasive	and	persuasive—has
grabbed	us	in	a	fearful	malaise	at	the	thought	of	being	involuntarily	controlled.
Although	the	fear	is	palpable,	we	are	like	the	heroes	in	every	zombie	film—
threatened	but	ultimately	more	powerful.	I	have	come	to	learn	that	habit-forming
products	can	do	far	more	good	than	harm.	Choice	architecture,	a	concept
described	by	famed	scholars	Thaler,	Sunstein,	and	Balz	in	their	same-titled
scholarly	paper,	offers	techniques	to	influence	people’s	decisions	and	affect
behavioral	outcomes.	Ultimately,	though,	the	practice	should	be	“used	to	help
nudge	people	to	make	better	choices	(as	judged	by	themselves).”
15
	Accordingly,
this	book	teaches	innovators	how	to	buil

===== PAGE 13 =====
Hooked
	seeks	to	unleash	the	tremendous	new	powers	innovators	and
entrepreneurs	have	to	influence	the	everyday	lives	of	billions	of	people.	I	believe
the	trinity	of	access,	data,	and	speed	presents	unprecedented	opportunities	to
create	positive	habits.
When	harnessed	correctly,	technology	can	enhance	lives	through
healthful	behaviors	that	improve	our	relationships,	make	us	smarter,	and
increase	productivity.
The	Hook	Model	explains	the	rationale	behind	the	design	of	many	successful
habit-forming	products	and	services	we	use	daily.	Although	not	exhaustive	given
the	vast	amount	of	academic	literature	available,	the	model	is	intended	to	be	a
practical	tool	(rather	than	a	theoretical	one)	made	for	entrepreneurs	and
innovators	who	aim	to	use	habits	for	good.	In	this	book	I	have	compiled	the	most
relevant	research,	shared	actionable	insights,	and	provided	a	practical	framework
designed	to	increase	the	innovator’s	odds	of	success.
Hooks	connect	the	user’s	problem	with	a	company’s	solution	frequently
enough	to	form	a	habit.	My	goal	is	to	provide	you	with	a	deeper	understanding
of	how	certain	products	change	what	we	do	and,	by	extension,	who	we	are.
HOW	TO	USE	THIS	BOOK
At	the	end	of	each	section,	you’ll	find	a	few	bulleted	takeaways.	Reviewing	them,
jotting	them	down	in	a	notebook,	or	sharing	them	on	a	social	network	is	a	great
way	to	pause,	reflect,	and	reinforce	what	you	have	read.
Building	a	habit-forming	product	yourself?	If	so,	the	“Do	This	Now”	sections	at
the	end	of	subsequent	chapters	will	help	guide	your	next	steps.
REMEMBER	&	SHARE
Habits
	are	defined	as	“behaviors	done	with	little	or	no	conscious
thought.”
The	convergence	of	access,	data,	and	speed	is	making	the
world	a	more	habit-forming	place.
Businesses	that	create	customer	habits	gain	a	significant
competitive	advantage.

===== PAGE 14 =====
The	Hook	Model	describes	an	experience	designed	to	connect
the	user’s	problem	to	a	solution	frequently	enough	to	form	a
habit.
The	Hook	Model	has	four	phases:	
trigger
,	
action
,	
variable
reward
,	and	
investment
.

===== PAGE 15 =====
1
The	Habit	Zone
When	I	run,	
I	zone	out.	I	don’t	think	about	what	my	body	is	doing	and	my	mind
usually	wanders	elsewhere.	I	find	it	relaxing	and	refreshing,	and	run	about	three
mornings	each	week.	Recently,	I	needed	to	take	an	overseas	client	call	during	my
usual	morning	run	time.	“No	biggie,”	I	thought.	“I	can	run	in	the	evening
instead.”	However,	the	time	shift	created	some	peculiar	behaviors	that	night.
I	left	the	house	for	my	run	at	dusk	and	as	I	was	about	to	pass	a	woman	taking
out	her	trash,	she	made	eye	contact	and	smiled.	I	politely	saluted	her	with	“Good
morning!”	and	then	caught	my	mistake:	“I	mean,	good	evening!	Sorry!”	I
corrected	myself,	realizing	I	was	about	ten	hours	off.	She	furrowed	her	brow	and
cracked	a	nervous	smile.
Slightly	embarrassed,	I	noted	how	my	mind	had	been	oblivious	to	the	time
of	day.	I	chided	myself	not	to	do	it	again,	but	within	a	few	minutes	I	passed
another	runner	and	again—as	if	possessed—I	blurted	out,	“Good	morning!”
What	was	going	on?
Back	home,	during	my	normal	post-run	shower,	my	mind	began	to	wander
again	as	it	often	does	when	I	bathe.	My	brain’s	autopilot	switch	turned	on	and	I
proceeded	with	my	daily	routine,	unaware	of	my	actions.
It	wasn’t	until	I	felt	the	nick	of	the	razor	cutting	my	face	that	I	realized	I	had
lathered	up	and	started	shaving.	Although	it	is	something	I	do	every	morning,
shaving	was	painfully	unnecessary	in	the	evening.	And	yet	I’d	done	it	anyway,
unknowingly.
The	evening	version	of	my	morning	run	had	triggered	a	behavioral	script
that	instructed	my	body	to	carry	out	my	usual	run-related	activities—all	without
mindful	awareness.	Such	is	the	nature	of	ingrained	habits—behaviors	done	with

===== PAGE 16 =====
little	or	no	conscious	thought—which,	by	some	estimates,	guide	nearly	half	of
our	daily	actions.
1
Habits	are	one	of	the	ways	the	brain	learns	complex	behaviors.
Neuroscientists	believe	habits	give	us	the	ability	to	focus	our	attention	on	other
things	by	storing	automatic	responses	in	the	basal	ganglia,	an	area	of	the	brain
associated	with	involuntary	actions.
2
Habits	form	when	the	brain	takes	a	shortcut	and	stops	actively	deliberating
over	what	to	do	next.
3
	The	brain	quickly	learns	to	codify	behaviors	that	provide
a	solution	to	whatever	situation	it	encounters.
For	example,	nail	biting	is	a	common	behavior	that	occurs	with	little	or	no
conscious	thought.	Initially,	the	biter	might	start	chomping	on	her	fingernail	for	a
reason—to	remove	an	unsightly	hangnail,	for	example.	However,	when	the
behavior	occurs	for	no	conscious	purpose—simply	as	an	automatic	response	to	a
cue—the	habit	is	in	control.	For	many	persistent	nail-biters,	the	unconscious
trigger	is	the	unpleasant	feeling	of	stress.	The	more	the	biter	associates	the	act	of
nail	chomping	with	the	temporary	relief	it	provides,	the	harder	it	becomes	to
change	the	conditioned	response.
Like	nail	biting,	many	of	our	daily	decisions	are	made	simply	because	that
was	the	way	we	have	found	resolution	in	the	past.	The	brain	automatically
deduces	that	if	the	decision	was	a	good	one	yesterday,	then	it	is	a	safe	bet	again
today	and	the	action	becomes	a	routine.
On	my	run	my	brain	had	associated	making	eye	contact	with	another	person
during	my	run	with	the	standard	“Good	morning!”	greeting;	thus	I	automatically
uttered	these	words	no	matter	how	inappropriately	timed.
WHY	HABITS	ARE	GOOD	FOR	BUSINESS
If	our	programmed	behaviors	are	so	influential	in	guiding	our	everyday	actions,
surely	harnessing	the	same	power	of	habits	can	be	a	boon	for	industry.	Indeed,	for
those	able	to	shape	them	in	an	effective	way,	habits	can	be	very	good	for	the
bottom	line.
Habit-forming	products	change	user	behavior	and	create	unprompted	user
engagement.	The	aim	is	to	influence	customers	to	use	your	product	on	their	own,
again	and	again,	without	relying	on	overt	calls	to	action	such	as	ads	or
promotions.	Once	a	habit	is	formed,	the	user	is	automatically	triggered	to	use	the
product	during	routine	events	such	as	wanting	to	kill	time	while	waiting	in	line.
However,	the	framework	and	practices	explored	in	this	book	are	not	“one	size
fits	all”	and	do	not	apply	to	every	business	or	industry.	Entrepreneurs	should

===== PAGE 17 =====
evaluate	how	user	habits	impact	their	particular	business	model	and	goals.	While
the	viability	of	some	products	depends	on	habit-formation	to	thrive,	that	is	not
always	the	case.
For	example,	companies	selling	infrequently	bought	or	used	products	or
services	do	not	require	habitual	users—at	least,	not	in	the	sense	of	everyday
engagement.	Life	insurance	companies,	for	instance,	leverage	salespeople,
advertising,	and	word-of-mouth	referrals	and	recommendations	to	prompt
consumers	to	buy	policies.	Once	the	policy	is	bought,	there	is	nothing	more	the
customer	needs	to	do.
In	this	book	I	refer	to	products	in	the	context	of	businesses	that	require
ongoing,	unprompted	user	engagement	and	therefore	need	to	build	user	habits.	I
exclude	companies	that	compel	customers	to	take	action	through	other	means.
Before	diving	into	the	mechanics	of	how	habits	are	made,	we	must	first
understand	their	general	importance	and	competitive	benefits	for	businesses.
Habit	formation	is	good	for	business	in	several	ways.
Increasing	Customer	Lifetime	Value
MBAs	are	taught	that	a	business	is	worth	the	sum	of	its	future	profits.	This
benchmark	is	how	investors	calculate	the	fair	price	of	a	company’s	shares.
CEOs	and	their	management	teams	are	evaluated	by	their	ability	to	increase
the	value	of	their	stocks—and	therefore	care	deeply	about	the	ability	of	their
companies	to	generate	free	cash	flow.	Management’s	job,	in	the	eyes	of
shareholders,	is	to	implement	strategies	to	grow	future	profits	by	increasing
revenues	or	decreasing	expenses.
Fostering	consumer	habits	is	an	effective	way	to	increase	the	value	of	a
company	by	driving	higher	customer	lifetime	value	(CLTV):	the	amount	of
money	made	from	a	customer	before	that	person	switches	to	a	competitor,	stops
using	the	product,	or	dies.	User	habits	increase	how	long	and	how	frequently
customers	use	a	product,	resulting	in	higher	CLTV.
Some	products	have	a	very	high	CLTV.	For	example,	credit	card	customers
tend	to	stay	loyal	for	a	very	long	time	and	are	worth	a	bundle.	Hence,	credit	card
companies	are	willing	to	spend	a	considerable	amount	of	money	acquiring	new
customers.	This	explains	why	you	receive	so	many	promotional	offers,	ranging
from	free	gifts	to	airline	bonus	miles,	to	entice	you	to	add	another	card	or
upgrade	your	current	one.	Your	potential	CLTV	justifies	a	credit	card	company’s
marketing	investment.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Providing	Pricing	Flexibility
Renowned	investor	and	Berkshire	Hathaway	CEO	Warren	Buffett	once	said,
“You	can	determine	the	strength	of	a	business	over	time	by	the	amount	of	agony
they	go	through	in	raising	prices.”
4
	Buffett	and	his	partner,	Charlie	Munger,
realized	that	as	customers	form	routines	around	a	product,	they	come	to	depend
upon	it	and	become	less	sensitive	to	price.	The	duo	have	pointed	to	consumer
psychology	as	the	rationale	behind	their	famed	investments	in	companies	like
See’s	Candies	and	Coca-Cola.
5
	Buffett	and	Munger	understand	that	habits	give
companies	greater	flexibility	to	increase	prices.
For	example,	in	the	free-to-play	video	game	business,	it	is	standard	practice
for	game	developers	to	delay	asking	users	to	pay	money	until	they	have	played
consistently	and	habitually.	Once	the	compulsion	to	play	is	in	place	and	the
desire	to	progress	in	the	game	increases,	converting	users	into	paying	customers
is	much	easier.	The	real	money	lies	in	selling	virtual	items,	extra	lives,	and
special	powers.
As	of	December	2013,	more	than	500	million	people	have	downloaded
Candy	Crush	Saga
,	a	game	played	mostly	on	mobile	devices.	The	game’s
“freemium”	model	converts	some	of	those	users	into	paying	customers,	netting
the	game’s	maker	nearly	$1	million	per	day.
6
This	pattern	also	applies	to	other	services.	For	example,	take	Evernote,	the
popular	note-taking	and	archiving	software:	It	is	free	to	use	but	the	company
offers	upgraded	features,	such	as	offline	viewing	and	collaboration	tools,	for	a
price—which	many	devoted	users	are	happy	to	pay.
Evernote’s	CEO	Phil	Libin	shared	some	revealing	insights	about	how	the
company	turns	nonpaying	users	into	revenue-generating	ones.
7
	In	2011	Libin
published	a	chart	now	known	as	the	“smile	graph.”	With	the	percentage	of	sign-
ups	represented	on	the	y-axis	and	time	spent	on	the	service	on	the	x-axis,	the
chart	showed	that,	although	usage	plummeted	at	first,	it	rocketed	upward	as
people	formed	a	habit	of	using	the	service.	The	resulting	down-and-up	curve
gave	the	chart	its	emblematic	smile	shape	(and	Evernote’s	CEO	a	matching
grin).
In	addition,	as	usage	increased	over	time,	so	did	customers’	willingness	to
pay.	Libin	noted	that	after	the	first	month,	only	0.5	percent	of	users	paid	for	the
service;	however,	this	rate	gradually	increased.	By	month	thirty-three,	11	percent
of	users	had	started	paying.	At	month	forty-two,	a	remarkable	26	percent	of
customers	were	paying	for	something	they	had	previously	used	for	fre

===== PAGE 19 =====
Supercharging	Growth
Users	who	continuously	find	value	in	a	product	are	more	likely	to	tell	their
friends	about	it.	Frequent	usage	creates	more	opportunities	to	encourage	people
to	invite	their	friends,	broadcast	content,	and	share	through	word	of	mouth.
Hooked	users	become	brand	evangelists—megaphones	for	your	company,
bringing	in	new	users	at	little	or	no	cost.
Products	with	higher	user	engagement	also	have	the	potential	to	grow	faster
than	their	rivals.	Case	in	point:	Facebook	leapfrogged	its	competitors,	including
MySpace	and	Friendster,	even	though	it	was	relatively	late	to	the	social
networking	party.	Although	its	competitors	both	had	healthy	growth	rates	and
millions	of	users	by	the	time	Mark	Zuckerberg’s	fledgling	site	launched	beyond
the	closed	doors	of	academia,	his	company	came	to	dominate	the	industry.
Facebook’s	success	was,	in	part,	a	result	of	what	I	call	the	
more	is	more
principle—more	frequent	usage	drives	more	viral	growth.	As	David	Skok,	tech
entrepreneur	turned	venture	capitalist,	points	out,	“The	most	important	factor	to
increasing	growth	is	.	.	.	Viral	Cycle	Time.”
9
	Viral	Cycle	Time	is	the	amount	of
time	it	takes	a	user	to	invite	another	user,	and	it	can	have	a	massive	impact.	“For
example,	after	20	days	with	a	cycle	time	of	two	days,	you	will	have	20,470
users,”	Skok	writes.	“But	if	you	halved	that	cycle	time	to	one	day,	you	would
have	over	20	million	users!	It	is	logical	that	it	would	be	better	to	have	more
cycles	occur,	but	it	is	less	obvious	just	how	much	better.”
Having	a	greater	proportion	of	users	daily	returning	to	a	service	dramatically
decreases	Viral	Cycle	Time	for	two	reasons:	First,	daily	users	initiate	loops	more
often	(think	tagging	a	friend	in	a	Facebook	photo);	second,	more	daily	active
users	means	more	people	to	respond	and	react	to	each	invitation.	The	cycle	not
only	perpetuates	the	process—with	higher	and	higher	user	engagement,	it
accelerates	it.
Sharpening	the	Competitive	Edge
User	habits	are	a	competitive	advantage.	Products	that	change	customer	routines
are	less	susceptible	to	attacks	from	other	companies.
Many	entrepreneurs	fall	into	the	trap	of	building	products	that	are	only
marginally	better	than	existing	solutions,	hoping	their	innovation	will	be	good
enough	to	woo	customers	away	from	existing	products.	But	when	it	comes	to
shaking	consumers’	old	habits,	these	naive	entrepreneurs	often	find	that	better

===== PAGE 20 =====
products	don’t	always	win—especially	if	a	large	number	of	users	have	already
adopted	a	competing	product.
A	classic	paper	by	John	Gourville,	a	professor	of	marketing	at	Harvard
Business	School,	stipulates	that	“many	innovations	fail	because	consumers
irrationally	overvalue	the	old	while	companies	irrationally	overvalue	the	new.”
10
Gourville	claims	that	for	new	entrants	to	stand	a	chance,	they	can’t	just	be
better,	they	must	be	nine	times	better.	Why	such	a	high	bar?	Because	old	habits
die	hard	and	new	products	or	services	need	to	offer	dramatic	improvements	to
shake	users	out	of	old	routines.	Gourville	writes	that	products	that	require	a	high
degree	of	behavior	change	are	doomed	to	fail	even	if	the	benefits	of	using	the
new	product	are	clear	and	substantial.
For	example,	the	technology	I	am	using	to	write	this	book	is	inferior	to
existing	alternatives	in	many	ways.	I’m	referring	to	the	QWERTY	keyboard
which	was	first	developed	in	the	1870s	for	the	now-ancient	typewriter.
QWERTY	was	designed	with	commonly	used	characters	spaced	far	apart.	This
layout	prevented	typists	from	jamming	the	metal	type	bars	of	early	machines.
11
This	physical	limitation	is	an	anachronism	in	the	digital	age,	yet	QWERTY
keyboards	remain	the	standard	despite	the	invention	of	far	better	layouts.
Professor	August	Dvorak’s	keyboard	design,	for	example,	placed	vowels	in	the
center	row,	increasing	typing	speed	and	accuracy.	Though	patented	in	1932,	the
Dvorak	Simplified	Keyboard	was	written	off.	QWERTY	survives	due	to	the	high
costs	of	changing	user	behavior.	When	first	introduced	to	the	keyboard,	we	use
the	hunt-and-peck	method.	After	months	of	practice,	we	instinctively	learn	to
activate	all	our	fingers	in	response	to	our	thoughts	with	little-to-no	conscious
effort,	and	the	words	begin	to	flow	effortlessly	from	mind	to	screen.	But
switching	to	an	unfamiliar	keyboard—even	if	more	efficient—would	force	us	to
relearn	how	to	type.	Fat	chance!
As	we	will	learn	in	chapter	5,	users	also	increase	their	dependency	on	habit-
forming	products	by
	storing	value
	in	them—further	reducing	the	likelihood	of
switching	to	an	alternative.	For	example,	every	e-mail	sent	and	received	using
Google’s	Gmail	is	stored	indefinitely,	providing	users	with	a	lasting	repository	of
past	conversations.	New	followers	on	Twitter	increase	users’	clout	and	amplify
their	ability	to	transmit	messages	to	their	communities.	Memories	and
experiences	captured	on	Instagram	are	added	to	one’s	digital	scrapbook.
Switching	to	a	n

===== PAGE 21 =====
Ultimately,	user	habits	increase	a	business’s	return	on	investment.	Higher
customer	lifetime	value,	greater	pricing	flexibility,	supercharged	growth,	and	a
sharpened	competitive	edge	together	equal	a	more	powerful	bang	for	the
company’s	buck.
Building	the	Mind	Monopoly
While	user	habits	are	a	boon	to	companies	fortunate	enough	to	engender	them,
their	existence	inherently	makes	success	less	likely	for	new	innovations	and
start-ups	trying	to	disrupt	the	status	quo.	The	fact	is	that	successfully	changing
long-term	user	habits	is	exceptionally	rare.
Altering	behavior	requires	not	only	an	understanding	of	how	to	persuade
people	to	act—for	example,	the	first	time	they	land	on	a	web	page—but	also
necessitates	getting	them	to	repeat	behaviors	for	long	periods,	ideally	for	the	rest
of	their	lives.
Companies	that	succeed	in	building	a	habit-forming	business	are	often
associated	with	game-changing,	wildly	successful	innovation.	But	like	any
discipline,	habit	design	has	rules	and	caveats	that	define	and	explain	why	some
products	change	lives	while	others	do	not.
For	one,	new	behaviors	have	a	short	half-life,	as	our	minds	tend	to	revert	to
our	old	ways	of	thinking	and	doing.	Experiments	show	that	lab	animals
habituated	to	new	behaviors	tend	to	regress	to	their	first	learned	behaviors	over
time.
12
	To	borrow	a	term	from	accounting,	behaviors	are	LIFO—“last	in,	first
out.”	In	other	words,	the	habits	you’ve	most	recently	acquired	are	also	the	ones
most	likely	to	go	soonest.
This	helps	explain	the	overwhelming	evidence	that	people	rarely	change
their	habits	for	long.	Two-thirds	of	alcoholics	who	complete	a	rehabilitation
program	will	pick	up	the	bottle,	and	their	old	habits,	within	a	year’s	time.
13
Research	shows	that	nearly	everyone	who	loses	weight	on	a	diet	gains	back	the
pounds	within	two	years.
14
The	enemy	of	forming	new	habits	is	past	behaviors,	and	research	suggests
that	old	habits	die	hard.	Even	when	we	change	our	routines,	neural	pathways
remain	etched	in	our	brains,	ready	to	be	reactivated	when	we	lose	focus.
15
	This
presents	an	especially	difficult	challenge	for	product	designers	trying	to	create
new	lines	or	businesses	based	on	forming	new	habits.
For	new	behaviors	to	really	take	hold,	they	must	occur	often.	In	a	recent

===== PAGE 22 =====
study	at	the	University	College	London,	researchers	followed	participants	as
they	attempted	to	form	a	habit	of	flossing	their	teeth.
16
	As	one	of	its	findings,	the
study	concluded	that	the	more	frequently	the	new	behavior	occurred,	the
stronger	the	habit	became.	Like	flossing,	frequent	engagement	with	a	product—
especially	over	a	short	period	of	time—increases	the	likelihood	of	forming	new
routines.
Google	Search	provides	an	example	of	a	service	built	upon	a	frequent
behavior	that	helped	create	users’	habits.	If	you’re	skeptical	that	Google	is	habit
forming	(and	you	are	a	frequent	Google	user),	just	try	using	Bing.	In	a	head-to-
head	comparison	of	the	efficacy	of	an	incognito	search,	the	products	are	nearly
identical.
17
	Even	if	the	geniuses	at	Google	have	in	fact	perfected	a	faster
algorithm,	the	time	saved	is	imperceptible	to	everyone	but	robots	and	Mr.	Spock.
Milliseconds	matter,	but	they	don’t	hook	users.
So	why	haven’t	more	Google	users	switched	to	Bing?	Habits	keep	users
loyal.	If	a	user	is	familiar	with	the	Google	interface,	switching	to	Bing	requires
cognitive	effort.	Although	many	aspects	of	Bing	are	similar	to	Google,	even	a
slight	change	in	pixel	placement	forces	the	would-be	user	to	learn	a	new	way	of
interacting	with	the	site.	Adapting	to	the	differences	in	the	Bing	interface	is	what
actually	slows	down	regular	Google	users	and	makes	Bing	feel	inferior,	not	the
technology	itself.
Internet	searches	occur	so	frequently	that	Google	is	able	to	cement	itself	as
the	one	and	only	solution	in	the	habituated	user’s	mind.	Users	no	longer	need	to
think	about	whether	or	not	to	use	Google;	they	just	do.	Furthermore,	whenever
the	company	can	identify	the	user	through	tracking	technology,	it	improves
search	results	based	on	past	behaviors	to	deliver	a	more	accurate	and
personalized	experience,	reinforcing	the	user’s	connection	with	the	search
engine.	The	more	the	product	is	used,	the	better	the	algorithm	gets,	and	thus	the
more	it	is	used.	The	result	is	a	virtuous	cycle	of	habit-driven	behavior	resulting
in	Google’s	market	domination.
18
HABIT	AS	STRATEGY
Sometimes	a	behavior	does	not	occur	as	frequently	as	flossing	or	Googling,	but	it
still	becomes	a	habit.	For	an	infrequent	action	to	become	a	habit,	the	user	must
perceive	a	high	degree	of	utility,	either	from	gaining	pleasure	or	avoiding	pain.
Take	Amazon	as	an	example:	The	e-tailer	has	its	sights	set	on	becoming	the

===== PAGE 23 =====
world’s	one-stop	shop.	Amazon	is	so	confident	in	its	ability	to	form	user	habits	that
it	sells	and	runs	ads	for	directly	competitive	products	on	its	site.
19
	Customers	often
see	the	item	they	are	about	to	buy	listed	at	a	cheaper	price	and	can	click	away	to
transact	elsewhere.	To	some,	this	sounds	like	a	formula	for	disaster.	But	to
Amazon,	it	is	a	shrewd	business	strategy.
Not	only	does	Amazon	make	money	from	the	ads	it	runs	from	competing
businesses,	it	also	utilizes	other	companies’	marketing	dollars	to	form	a	habit	in
the	shopper’s	mind.	Amazon	seeks	to	become	the	solution	to	a	frequently
occurring	pain	point—the	customer’s	desire	to	find	the	items	they	want.
By	addressing	shoppers’	price	concerns,	Amazon	earns	loyalty	even	if	it
doesn’t	make	the	sale	and	comes	across	as	trustworthy	in	the	process.	The	tactic
is	backed	by	a	2003	study,	which	demonstrated	that	consumers’	preference	for	an
online	retailer	increases	when	they	are	offered	competitive	price	information.
20
The	technique	has	also	been	used	by	Progressive,	the	car	insurance	company,	to
drive	over	$15	billion	of	annual	insurance	sales,	up	from	just	$3.4	billion	before	the
tactic	was	implemented.
By	allowing	users	to	comparison	shop	from	within	the	site,	Amazon	provides
tremendous	perceived	utility	to	its	customers.	Although	shopping	on	Amazon	may
not	occur	as	frequently	as	searching	on	Google,	the	company	solidifies	its	place
as	the	default	solution	to	customers’	purchasing	needs	with	each	successful
transaction.	In	fact,	people	are	so	comfortable	comparison	shopping	on	Amazon
that	they	frequently	use	the	company’s	mobile	app	to	check	prices	when	standing
in	the	aisles	of	real	stores—often	making	a	purchase	from	inside	a	competing
retailer.
21
In	the	Habit	Zone
A	company	can	begin	to	determine	its	product’s	habit-forming	potential	by
plotting	two	factors:	
frequency
	(how	often	the	behavior	occurs)	and	
perceived
utility
	(how	useful	and	rewarding	the	behavior	is	in	the	user’s	mind	over
alternative	solutions).
Googling	occurs	multiple	times	per	day,	but	any	particular	search	is
negligibly	better	than	rival	services	like	Bing.	Conversely,	using	Amazon	may	be
a	less	frequent	occurrence,	but	users	receive	great	value	knowing	they’ll	find
whatever	they	need	at	the	one	and	only	“everything	store.”
22

===== PAGE 24 =====
FIGURE
	1
As	represented	in	figure	1,	a	behavior	that	occurs	with	enough	frequency	and
perceived	utility	enters	the	
Habit	Zone
,	helping	to	make	it	a	default	behavior.	If
either	of	these	factors	falls	short	and	the	behavior	lies	below	the	threshold,	it	is
less	likely	that	the	desired	behavior	will	become	a	habit.
Note	that	the	line	slopes	downward	but	never	quite	reaches	the	perceived
utility	axis.	Some	behaviors	never	become	habits	because	they	do	not	occur
frequently	enough.	No	matter	how	much	utility	is	involved,	infrequent	behaviors
remain	conscious	actions	and	never	create	the	automatic	response	that	is
characteristic	of	habits.	On	the	other	axis,	however,	even	a	behavior	that
provides	minimal	perceived	benefit	can	become	a	habit	simply	because	it	occurs
frequently.
This	concept	is	meant	to	be	a	guiding	theory,	and	the	scale	of	the	illustration
is	intentionally	left	blank.	Unfortunately	for	companies,	research	thus	far	has	not
found	a	universal	timescale	for	turning	all	behaviors	into	habits.	A	2010	study

===== PAGE 25 =====
found	that	some	habits	can	be	formed	in	a	matter	of	weeks	while	others	can	take
more	than	five	months.
23
	The	researchers	also	found	that	the	complexity	of	the
behavior	and	how	important	the	habit	was	to	the	person	greatly	affected	how
quickly	the	routine	was	formed.
There	are	few	rules	when	it	comes	to	answering	“How	frequent	is	frequent
enough?”	and	the	answer	is	likely	specific	to	each	business	and	behavior.
However,	as	the	previously	mentioned	flossing	study	demonstrates,	we	know
that	higher	frequency	is	better.
Think	of	the	products	and	services	you	would	identify	as	habit	forming.
Most	of	these	are	used	daily,	if	not	multiple	times	per	day.	Let’s	explore	why	we
use	these	products	so	frequently.
Vitamins	Versus	Painkillers
It’s	never	been	easier	to	launch	a	new	product	or	service,	yet	most	new
endeavors	fail.	Why?	Products	fail	for	a	variety	of	reasons:	Companies	run	out
of	funding,	products	enter	markets	too	early	or	too	late,	the	marketplace	doesn’t
need	what	companies	are	offering,	or	founders	simply	give	up.	Just	as	failure	has
many	causes,	success	too	can	be	attributed	to	a	variety	of	factors.	However,	one
aspect	is	common	to	all	successful	innovations—they	solve	problems.	That	may
seem	obvious,	but	understanding	the	kind	of	problem	a	new	product	solves	can
be	a	topic	of	much	debate.
“Are	you	building	a	vitamin	or	painkiller?”	is	a	common,	almost	clichéd
question	many	investors	ask	founders	eager	to	cash	their	first	venture	capital
check.	The	correct	answer,	from	the	perspective	of	most	investors,	is	the	latter:	a
painkiller.	Likewise,	innovators	in	companies	big	and	small	are	constantly	asked
to	prove	their	idea	is	important	enough	to	merit	the	time	and	money	needed	to
build	it.	Gatekeepers	such	as	investors	and	managers	want	to	invest	in	solving
real	problems	or	meeting	immediate	needs	by	backing	painkillers.
Painkillers	solve	an	obvious	need,	relieving	a	specific	pain,	and	often
have	quantifiable	markets.
Think	Tylenol,	the	brand-name	version	of	acetaminophen,	and	the	product’s
promise	of	reliable	relief.	It’s	the	kind	of	ready-made	solution	for	which	people
are	happy	to	pay.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Seeking	pleasure	and	avoiding	pain	are	two	key	motivators	in	all	species.
When	we	feel	discomfort,	we	seek	to	escape	the	uncomfortable	sensation.	In	the
next	chapter,	we	will	explore	how	emotions,	often	negative	ones,	trigger	users	to
reach	for	solutions.	For	now,	the	important	thing	to	remember	is	that	habit-
forming	products	create	associations	in	users’	minds—and	that	the	solution	to
their	pain	may	be	found	in	your	product’s	use.
We’ll	discuss	the	morality	of	manipulation	in	chapter	8;	however,	it	is	worth
noting	that	although	some	people	use	the	terms	interchangeably,	
habits
	are	not
the	same	things	as	
addictions
.	The	latter	word	means	persistent,	compulsive
dependencies	on	a	behavior	or	substance.	Addictions,	by	definition,	are	self-
destructive.	Thus,	it	is	irresponsible	to	make	products	that	rely	on	creating	and
maintaining	user	addictions	because	doing	so	would	mean	intentionally	harming
people.
A	habit,	on	the	other	hand,	is	a	behavior	that	can	have	a	positive	influence	on
a	person’s	life.	Habits	can	be	healthy	or	unhealthy,	and	you	likely	have	several
helpful	habits	you	carry	out	throughout	your	day.	Did	you	brush	your	teeth
today?	Take	a	shower?	Did	you	express	gratitude	by	saying	“Thanks”?	Or	in	my
case,	use	the	greeting	“Good	morning”	while	on	an	
evening
	jog?	These	are
common	behaviors	done	with	little	or	no	deliberation—they	are	habits.
Diving	into	the	Hook	Model
Ready	to	learn	more	about	creating	positive	user	habits?	Read	on	to	gain	a
deeper	understanding	of	the	Hook	Model,	a	simple	yet	powerful	way	to	help
your	customers	form	habits	that	connect	their	problem	with	your	solution.
In	the	next	chapters	we	dive	into	each	phase	of	the	Hook	Model.	Along	the
way	I	will	provide	examples	you	can	use	in	the	design	of	your	own	product	or
service.	By	learning	a	few	fundamentals	of	how	the	mind	works,	you	will
increase	your	odds	of	building	the	right	product	faster.
By	progressing	users	through	the	four	steps	of	the	Hook	Model—trigger,
action,	variable	reward,	and	investment—hooks	form	habits.
REMEMBER	&	SHARE
For	some	businesses,	forming	habits	is	a	critical	component	to

===== PAGE 31 =====
become	such	an	important	part	of	her	life?	As	we	will	soon	learn,	habits	like
Yin’s	are	formed	over	time,	but	the	chain	reaction	that	forms	a	habit	always
starts	with	a	trigger.
HABITS	ARE	NOT	CREATED,	THEY	ARE	BUILT
UPON
Habits	are	like	pearls.	Oysters	create	natural	pearls	by	accumulating	layer	upon
layer	of	a	nacre	called	mother-of-pearl,	eventually	forming	the	smooth	treasure
over	several	years.	But	what	causes	the	nacre	to	begin	forming	a	pearl?	The
arrival	of	a	tiny	irritant,	such	as	a	piece	of	grit	or	an	unwelcome	parasite,	triggers
the	oyster’s	system	to	begin	blanketing	the	invader	with	layers	of	shimmery
coating.
Similarly,	new	habits	need	a	foundation	upon	which	to	build.	Triggers	provide
the	basis	for	sustained	behavior	change.
Reflect	on	your	own	life	for	a	moment.	What	woke	you	up	this	morning?	What
caused	you	to	brush	your	teeth?	What	brought	you	to	read	this	book?
Triggers	take	the	form	of	obvious	cues	like	the	morning	alarm	clock	but	also
come	as	more	subtle,	sometimes	subconscious	signals	that	just	as	effectively
influence	our	daily	behavior.	A	trigger	is	the	actuator	of	behavior—the	grit	in	the
oyster	that	precipitates	the	pearl.	Whether	we	are	cognizant	of	them	or	not,
triggers	move	us	to	take	action.
Triggers	come	in	two	types:	
external
	and	
internal
.
External	Triggers
Habit-forming	technologies	start	changing	behavior	by	first	cueing	users	with	a
call	to	action.	This	sensory	stimuli	is	delivered	through	any	number	of	things	in
our	environment.
External	triggers	are	embedded	with	information,	which	tells	the	user
what	to	do	next.
An	external	trigger	communicates	the	next	action	the	user	should	take.
Often,	the	desired	action	is	made	explicitly	clear.	For	example,	what	external
triggers	do	you	see	in	this	Coca-Cola	vending	machine	in	figure	2?
Take	a	close	look	at	the	welcoming	man	in	the	image.	He	is	offering	you	a

===== PAGE 34 =====
we’ve	all	learned	that	Web	site	links	are	for	clicking	and	app	icons	are	for
tapping.	The	only	purpose	for	these	common	visual	triggers	is	to	prompt	the	user
to	action.	As	a	readily	accepted	aspect	of	interface	design,	these	calls	to	action
don’t	need	to	tell	people	how	to	use	them;	the	information	is	embedded.
Types	of	External	Triggers
Companies	can	utilize	four	types	of	external	triggers	to	move	users	to	complete
desired	actions:
1.	Paid	Triggers
Advertising,	search	engine	marketing,	and	other	paid	channels	are	commonly
used	to	get	users’	attention	and	prompt	them	to	act.	Paid	triggers	can	be	effective
but	costly	ways	to	keep	users	coming	back.	Habit-forming	companies	tend	not	to
rely	on	paid	triggers	for	very	long,	if	at	all.	Imagine	if	Facebook	or	Twitter
needed	to	buy	an	ad	to	prompt	users	to	revisit	their	sites—these	companies
would	soon	go	broke.
Because	paying	for	reengagement	is	unsustainable	for	most	business	models,
companies	generally	use	paid	triggers	to	acquire	new	users	and	then	leverage
other	triggers	to	bring	them	back.
2.	Earned	Triggers
Earned	triggers	are	free	in	that	they	cannot	be	bought	directly,	but	they	often
require	investment	in	the	form	of	time	spent	on	public	and	media	relations.
Favorable	press	mentions,	hot	viral	videos,	and	featured	app	store	placements
are	all	effective	ways	to	gain	attention.	Companies	may	be	lulled	into	thinking
that	related	downloads	or	sales	spikes	signal	long-term	success,	yet	awareness
generated	by	earned	triggers	can	be	short-lived.
For	earned	triggers	to	drive	ongoing	user	acquisition,	companies	must	keep
their	products	in	the	limelight—a	difficult	and	unpredictable	task.
3.	Relationship	Triggers

===== PAGE 41 =====
design	our	solution	to	help	calm	Julie’s	fear.	Naturally,	we	might	have	come	to
another	conclusion	by	starting	with	a	different	persona,	varying	the	narrative,	or
coming	up	with	different	hypothetical	answers	along	the	chain	of	whys.	Only	an
accurate	understanding	of	our	user’s	underlying	needs	can	inform	the	product
requirements.
Now	that	we	have	an	understanding	of	the	user’s	pain,	we	can	move	on	to
the	next	step	of	testing	our	product	to	see	if	it	solves	his	problem.
Unpacking	Instagram’s	Triggers
A	large	component	of	Instagram’s	success—and	what	brings	its	millions	of	users
back	nearly	every	day—is	the	company’s	ability	to	understand	its	users’	triggers.
For	people	like	Yin,	Instagram	is	a	harbor	for	emotions	and	inspirations,	a	virtual
memoir	preserved	in	pixels.
Yin’s	habitual	use	of	the	service	started	with	an	external	trigger—a
recommendation	from	a	friend	and	weeks	of	repetitious	use	before	she	became	a
regular	user.
Every	time	Yin	snaps	a	picture,	she	shares	it	with	her	friends	on	Facebook
and	Twitter.	Consider	the	first	time	you	saw	an	Instagram	photo.	Did	it	catch
your	attention?	Did	it	make	you	curious?	Did	it	call	you	to	action?
These	photos	serve	as	a	
relationship	external	trigger
,	raising	awareness	and
serving	as	a	cue	for	others	to	install	and	use	the	app.	But	Instagram	photos
shared	on	Facebook	and	Twitter	were	not	the	only	external	triggers	driving	new
users.	Others	learned	of	the	app	from	the	media	and	bloggers,	or	through	the
featured	placement	Apple	granted	Instagram	in	its	App	Store—all	
earned
external	triggers
.
Once	installed,	Instagram	benefited	from	
owned	external	
triggers.	The	app
icon	on	users’	phone	screens	and	push	notifications	about	their	friends’	postings
served	to	call	them	back.
With	repeated	use,	Instagram	formed	strong	associations	with	internal
triggers,	and	what	was	once	a	brief	distraction	became	an	intraday	routine	for
many	users.
It	is	the	fear	of	losing	a	special	moment	that	instigates	a	pang	of	stress.	This
negative	emotion	is	the	internal	trigger	that	brings	Instagram	users	back	to	the
app	to	alleviate	this	pain	by	capturing	a	photo.	As	users	continue	to	use	the
service,	new	internal	triggers	form.

===== PAGE 51 =====
FIGURE
	7
In	the	late	1990s	blogging	changed	the	web.	Before	this	era,	amateur	writers
had	to	purchase	their	own	domain,	fiddle	with	DNS	settings,	find	a	web	host,
and	set	up	a	content-management	system	to	present	their	writing.	Suddenly,	new
companies	such	as	Blogger	eliminated	most	of	these	steps	by	allowing	users	to
simply	register	an	account	and	start	posting.
Evan	Williams,	cofounder	of	Blogger	and	Twitter,	echoes	Hauptly’s	formula
for	innovation	when	he	describes	his	own	approach	to	building	two	massively
successful	companies:
“Take	a	human	desire,	preferably	one	that	has	been	around	for	a	really
long	time	.	.	.	Identify	that	desire	and	use	modern	technology	to	take	out
steps.”
Blogger	made	posting	content	online	dramatically	easier.	The	result?	The
percentage	of	users	creating	content	online,	as	opposed	to	simply	consuming	it,

===== PAGE 59 =====
FIGURE
	13
MOTIVATION	OR	ABILITY:	WHICH	SHOULD	YOU
INCREASE	FIRST?
After	uncovering	the	triggers	that	prompt	user	actions	and	deciding	which	actions
you	want	to	turn	into	habits,	you	can	increase	motivation	and	ability	to	spark	the
likelihood	of	your	users	taking	a	desired	behavior.	But	which	should	you	invest	in
first,	motivation	or	ability?	Where	is	your	time	and	money	better	spent?	The
answer	is	always	to	start	with	ability.
Naturally,	all	three	parts	of	B	=	MAT	must	be	present	for	a	singular	user	action
to	occur;	without	a	clear	trigger	and	sufficient	motivation	there	will	be	no	behavior.
However,	for	companies	building	technology	solutions,	the	greatest	return	on
investment	generally	comes	from	increasing	a	product’s	ease	of	use.
The	fact	is,	increasing	motivation	is	expensive	and	time	consuming.	Web	site
visitors	tend	to	ignore	instructional	text;	they	are	often	multitasking	and	have	little
patience	for	explanations	about	why	or	how	they	should	do	something.	Influencing
behavior	by	reducing	the	effort	required	to	perform	an	action	is	more	effective	than
increasing	someone’s	desire	to	do	it.	Make	your	product	so	simple	that	users
already	know	how	to	use	it,	and	you’ve	got	a	winner.

===== PAGE 61 =====
goal,	the	company	decided	to	make	another	switch.
FIGURE
	15—
THE
	
TWITTER
	
HOME
	
PAGE
	
IN
	2010
During	the	company’s	period	of	hyper-growth,	the	Twitter	home	page
became	radically	simpler	(figure	16).	The	product	description	is	itself	only	140
characters	long	and	has	evolved	from	the	cognitively	difficult	request	that	users
broadcast	their	information	(as	seen	in	2009)	to	the	less	taxing	“find	out	what’s
happening,	right	now,	with	the	people	and	organizations	you	care	about.”
The	big,	bold	image	of	people	looking	into	some	kind	of	light-emanating
event,	like	a	concert	or	a	soccer	match,	metaphorically	communicates	the	value
of	the	service	while	piquing	curiosity.	Most	strikingly,	the	page	has	two	very
clear	calls	to	action:	sign	in	or	sign	up.	The	company	made	the	desired	action	as
simple	as	possible,	knowing	that	getting	users	to	experience	the	service	would
yield	better	results	than	trying	to	persuade	them	to	use	it	while	still	on	the	home
page.

===== PAGE 71 =====
	
4
Variable	Reward
Ultimately,	all	businesses	
help	users	achieve	an	objective.	As	we	learned	in
the	previous	chapter,	reducing	the	steps	needed	to	complete	the	intended
outcome	increases	the	likelihood	of	that	outcome.	But	to	keep	users	engaged,
products	need	to	deliver	on	their	promises.	To	form	the	learned	associations	we
discussed	in	chapter	2,	the	trigger	phase,	users	must	come	to	depend	on	the
product	as	a	reliable	solution	to	their	problem—the	salve	for	the	itch	they	came
to	scratch.
The	third	step	in	the	Hook	Model	is	the	
variable	reward	phase
,	in	which	you
reward	your	users	by	solving	a	problem,	reinforcing	their	motivation	for	the
action	taken	in	the	previous	phase.	To	understand	why	rewards—and	variable
rewards	in	particular—are	so	powerful,	we	must	first	take	a	trip	deep	inside	the
brain.
Understanding	Rewards
In	the	1940s	two	researchers,	James	Olds	and	Peter	Milner,	accidentally
discovered	how	a	special	area	of	the	brain	is	the	source	of	our	cravings.	The
researchers	implanted	electrodes	in	the	brains	of	lab	mice	that	enabled	the	mice
to	give	themselves	tiny	electric	shocks	to	a	small	area	of	the	brain,	the	nucleus
accumbens.
1
	The	mice	quickly	became	hooked	on	the	sensation.
Olds	and	Milner	demonstrated	that	the	lab	mice	would	forgo	food,	water,
and	even	run	across	a	painful	electrified	grid	for	the	opportunity	to	continue
pressing	the	lever	that	administered	the	shocks.	A	few	years	later,	other

===== PAGE 72 =====
researchers	tested	the	human	response	to	self-administered	stimulus	in	the	same
area	of	the	brain.	The	results	were	just	as	dramatic	as	in	the	mouse	trial—
subjects	wanted	to	do	nothing	but	press	the	brain-stimulating	button.	Even	when
the	machine	was	turned	off,	people	continued	pressing	the	button.	Researchers
had	to	forcibly	take	the	devices	from	subjects	who	refused	to	relinquish	them.
Given	the	responses	they	had	earlier	found	in	lab	animals,	Olds	and	Milner
concluded	that	they	had	discovered	the	brain’s	pleasure	center.	In	fact,	we	now
know	other	things	that	feel	good	also	activate	the	same	neural	region.	Sex,
delicious	food,	a	bargain,	and	even	our	digital	devices	all	tap	into	this	deep
recess	of	the	brain,	providing	the	impetus	for	many	of	our	behaviors.
However,	more	recent	research	has	shown	that	these	two	researchers’
experiments	were	not	stimulating	pleasure	per	se.	Stanford	professor	Brian
Knutson	conducted	a	study	exploring	blood	flow	in	the	brains	of	people
wagering	while	inside	an	fMRI	machine.
2
	The	test	subjects	played	a	gambling
game	while	Knutson	and	his	team	looked	at	which	areas	of	their	brains	became
more	active.	The	startling	results	showed	that	the	nucleus	accumbens	was	not
activating	when	the	reward	(in	this	case	a	monetary	payout)	was	received,	but
rather	in	anticipation	of	it.
The	study	revealed	that	what	draws	us	to	act	is	not	the	sensation	we
receive	from	the	reward	itself,	but	the	need	to	alleviate	the	craving	for
that	reward.
The	stress	of	desire	in	the	brain	appears	to	compel	us,	just	as	it	did	in	Olds’s
and	Milner’s	lab	mouse	experiments.
UNDERSTANDING	VARIABILITY
If	you’ve	never	watched	a	YouTube	video	of	a	baby’s	first	encounter	with	a	dog,
it’s	worth	doing.	Not	only	are	these	videos	incredibly	cute,	but	they	help
demonstrate	something	important	about	our	mental	wiring.
At	first	the	expression	on	the	baby’s	face	seems	to	ask,	“What	is	this	hairy
monster	doing	in	my	house?	Will	it	hurt	me?	What	will	it	do	next?”	The	child	is
filled	with	curiosity,	uncertain	if	this	creature	might	cause	harm.	But	soon	the	child
figures	out	Rover	is	not	a	threat.	What	follows	is	an	explosion	of	infectious	giggles.
Researchers	believe	laughter	may	in	fact	be	a	release	valve	when	we	experience
the	discomfort	and	excitement	of	uncertainty,	but	without	fear	of	harm.
3

===== PAGE 81 =====
FIGURE
	23
3.	Pinterest
Pinterest,	a	company	that	has	grown	to	reach	over	50	million	monthly	users
worldwide,	also	employs	a	feed,	but	with	a	visual	twist.
17
	The	online
pinboarding	site	is	a	virtual	smorgasbord	of	objects	of	desire.	The	site	is	curated
by	its	community	of	users	who	ensure	that	a	high	degree	of	intriguing	content
appears	on	each	page.
